Welcome to the Huberman Lab Podcast,
where we discuss science and science-based tools
for everyday life.
I'm Andrew Huberman,
and I'm a professor of neurobiology and ophthalmology
at Stanford School of Medicine.
Today, we are discussing grief.
Grief is a natural emotion that most everybody experiences
at some point in their life.
However, grief is something
that still mystifies most people.
For instance, we often wonder why getting over
the loss of somebody or a pet is so absolutely crushing.
In some cases, it's obvious
because we had a very close relationship
to that person or animal.
But in other cases, it's bewildering
because somehow, despite our best efforts,
we are unable to reframe and shift our mind to the idea
that the person or animal that at one point was here
and so very present is now gone.
Today, we are going to discuss how we conceptualize grief,
both at an emotional and at a logical level.
I'm going to teach you about the neuroscience
and the psychology of grief and incredible findings
that have been made in just a few key laboratories
that point to the fact that we essentially map
our experience of people in three dimensions.
Let's just give you a little hint
of what those dimensions are.
They relate to space, where people are,
time, when people are, I'll explain what that means,
and a dimension called closeness
and how those three dimensions of space, time, and closeness
are what establish very close bonds with people
and are what require remapping, reorganization
within our emotional framework and our logical framework
when we lose somebody for whatever reason.
Within that understanding, I'm confident
that you will have greater insight into the grief process.
And should you ever find yourself within the grief process,
as I imagine most everyone will at some point,
you will be able to navigate that process
in what psychologists and neuroscientists deem to be
the most healthy way of going through grief.
Indeed, moving through grief requires a specific form
of neuroplasticity, a reordering of brain connections,
and also the connections between the brain and body.
I'm going to teach you about all of that today.
So you're going to learn a lot of scientific information.
You will also learn a lot of tools
that you can put in your kit of emotional
and really emotional physical tools
that will allow you to move through grief
in this healthy way that I referred to earlier.
I'll also point out some of the myths about grief.
For instance, many of you have probably heard
that there are designated stages of grief
that everybody moves through.
It turns out that recent research refutes that idea.
There are different stages of grief,
but not everybody experiences all of them.
And hardly ever does somebody move through
all of those linearly, meaning in the same order.
I also want to point out that for many of you
that are not experiencing grief in this moment,
there's an important scientific literature
that teaches us that how we show up to grief,
meaning our psychological and our biological state
that we happen to be in when a loss occurs,
strongly dictates whether or not we end up
in what's called complicated or non-complicated grief.
And non-complicated grief is a form of grief
that is very prolonged.
And in fact, often requires that people get
substantial professional help.
So whether or not you're experiencing grief,
that's mild, moderate, or very intense right now,
or whether or not you are not experiencing
any grief at all,
you're going to learn scientific information
and tools that will help you navigate
through this process that we call grief.
Before we begin, I'd like to emphasize that this podcast
is separate from my teaching and research roles at Stanford.
It is, however, part of my desire and effort
to bring zero cost to consumer information about science
and science-related tools to the general public.
In keeping with that theme,
I'd like to thank the sponsors of today's podcast.
Our first sponsor is Eight Sleep.
Eight Sleep makes smart mattress covers
that have cooling, heating, and sleep tracking capabilities.
I recently started sleeping
with an Eight Sleep mattress cover,
and I am so glad that I did
because the sleep that I'm getting is superb
compared to the sleep I was getting previously.
I always thought that I slept pretty well,
especially since I apply a number of different tools
in order to sleep well,
things like supplements,
things like keeping the room cool, et cetera,
but I have had a repeating problem over the years,
which is that I would wake up
in the middle of the night often
and sometimes have a bit of trouble
or a lot of trouble getting back to sleep.
I would have to apply other tools
in order to get back to sleep.
Eight Sleep allows me to adjust
the temperature of my mattress and my sleeping environment
so that I fall asleep easily
and stay asleep throughout the night,
which as many of you know, is a game changer.
Temperature is a powerful regulator of sleep
and the ability to get into sleep.
We know for instance,
that the body needs to drop by one to three degrees
in order to get into sleep and to stay asleep.
And with Eight Sleep,
I can program the temperature of my bed
so that it gets cooler as I fall asleep,
gets even colder as I enter deep sleep
and at the transition to REM sleep,
rapid eye movement sleep,
it can get even cooler if I like.
I actually like to maintain the same temperature
through deep and REM sleep.
And then it heats up slightly as I head towards morning
because of course heating up of the body
is one way in which we wake up.
So I have this nice contour of cooling and heating
that puts me through a beautiful arc
of falling and staying asleep and waking up when I want to.
If you want to try Eight Sleep,
you can go to eightsleep.com slash Huberman
and check out the PodPro cover
and save more than $150
with an exclusive Memorial Day discount now
through June 6th, 2022.
Eight Sleep currently ships within the USA,
Canada and the UK.
Again, that's eightsleep.com slash Huberman
to save over $150 with an exclusive Memorial Day discount
now through June 6th.
Today's podcast is also brought to us by Inside Tracker.
Inside Tracker is a personalized nutrition platform
that analyzes data from your blood and DNA
to help you better understand your body
and help you reach your health goals.
I've long been a believer in getting regular blood work done
for the simple reason that many of the factors
that impact your immediate and long-term health
can only be assessed from a quality blood test.
And nowadays with the advent of modern DNA tests,
you can also get insight into, for instance,
what your biological age is
and compare that to your chronological age.
And of course your biological age
is the number that truly matters.
One issue with a lot of blood tests
and DNA tests out there, however,
is that you get values back about metabolic factors,
hormones and lipids, et cetera,
but you don't know what to do with that information.
Inside Tracker solves that problem.
They have a very easy to use personalized platform.
It's a website where you can literally place your cursor
over a given value,
say for a hormone or metabolic factor or lipid.
And it will tell you what you can do
in terms of nutrition, behaviors and supplementation
in order to bring those values into the range
that are optimal for you and your health.
Find this immensely useful and very easy to use.
If you'd like to try Inside Tracker,
you can go to insidetracker.com slash Huberman
to get 20% off any of Inside Tracker's plans.
Again, that's insidetracker.com slash Huberman
to get 20% off.
Today's episode is also brought to us by Roca.
Roca makes sunglasses and eyeglasses
that are the absolute highest quality
and have extreme versatility
in terms of what they can be used for
and when you wear them.
What do I mean by that?
Well, the company was founded
by two all American swimmers from Stanford,
and their goal was to develop eyeglasses for performance,
things like running and biking and so forth.
And you can certainly wear them for those activities.
And I do wear them for those activities.
I wear readers at night.
I also wear sunglasses sometimes when it's very bright out.
One of the things that's terrific about Roca sunglasses
and eyeglasses, however,
is that they're not just designed for sport.
They have a terrific aesthetic,
and you can also wear them out to dinner,
to work and so on.
I say this because at least in my opinion,
a lot of so-called sport eyeglasses
or high-performance eyeglasses and sunglasses
make people look like cyborgs.
Roca, the aesthetic is really terrific.
They're extremely lightweight,
and they don't slip off even when you're sweaty.
So you can indeed wear them on a hot day
or when running or cycling.
They're not going to slip off your face.
They're so lightweight, in fact,
that I often forget that they're on my face.
If you'd like to try Roca sunglasses or eyeglasses,
go to roca.com, that's R-O-K-A.com,
and enter the code Huberman to save 20% off
on your first order.
Again, that's Roca, R-O-K-A.com,
and enter the code Huberman at checkout.
Okay, let's talk about grief.
I just want to remind you that everybody at some point
in their life experiences grief,
either mild grief, moderate grief, or extreme grief.
And it's somewhat obvious, but worth stating nonetheless,
that how intense grief feels and how long it lasts
scales with how close we were with somebody.
And if you learn that the person who works
at the coffee shop or that you see at the coffee shop
on a regular basis happened to pass away
or tragically get killed in a car accident,
that can be quite upsetting.
It can be somewhat disorienting to you
if you, for instance, just saw them yesterday,
or they seemed perfectly fine when you saw them last.
But of course, the grief that results
from the loss of somebody to whom you have
that level of attachment is far and away different
than the level of grief that you would experience
from the death of a very close loved one,
a sibling, a parent, God forbid, a child.
When that type of loss occurs,
it's often the case that our entire relationship
to life feels different.
Places and things that at once brought us joy and laughter
now bring the opposite.
They bring us intense feelings of sadness and loss.
Psychologists and neuroscientists distinguish
between complicated grief and non-complicated grief.
They are very similar at the outset.
One of the fundamental differences between them, however,
is that complicated grief,
which occurs in about one in 10 people,
is a situation in which grief does not seem
to resolve itself even after a prolonged period of time.
Later in the episode,
I'll point you to the actual tests that are used.
I've provided links to those in the show note captions
that will allow you to distinguish
between complicated and non-complicated grief.
These arrive through the important research
of the world-class grief researchers that are out there
and the psychologists that treat grief.
The important thing to point out is that grief is a process.
Like any biological or psychological event,
it has a beginning, a middle, and an end.
And I do believe that being able to orient
in terms of where you are in that process
can be immensely beneficial,
not just for predicting how long it's going to last,
but in order to conceptualize the person or animal
that you lost in a way that allows you
to best preserve their memory
while maintaining your own functional capacity in life.
Along those lines,
I want to point out that grief and depression,
while they can feel quite similar in certain ways
and have overlapping symptomology, loss of appetite,
challenges sleeping, crying in the middle of the day
for no apparent reason, et cetera,
they are distinctly different processes.
The modern research teaches us, for instance,
that grief rarely responds well to antidepressants,
whereas depression can often respond well
to antidepressants.
Everything we know and understand about grief
is that it is a distinct psychological and physiological
event in the brain and body from depression.
Rather, perhaps the best way to think about grief
is that it is actually a motivational state.
It is a yearning, it is a desire for something.
And somewhat surprisingly,
it's not just a desire to have that person back
or to have that animal back.
You might think, well, that's crazy, of course it is.
But of course, there are instances in which
someone passing away or an animal passing away
is actually providing relief for that person
because of where they happen to be in their life.
Today, I'll teach you about grief as a motivational process
because grief as a motivational process
really is the way that scientists and psychologists
now conceptualize grief and the treatments for grief
so that people can move through them effectively.
As we wade into this important topic,
I'd like to emphasize some of the common myths
and misunderstandings about grief.
Some of the myths and misunderstanding
arrived from the beautiful work of Elizabeth Kubler-Ross,
a psychologist who wrote the famous book
On Death and Dying.
And I should emphasize that while
Kubler-Ross was a real pioneer
in establishing that there are indeed
different stages of grief,
the modern science, both psychology and neuroscience,
point to the fact that not everybody experiences
all of the stages that Kubler-Ross defined,
nor do they move through those stages in a linear manner.
Sometimes they're out of sequence.
I'll just highlight the five stages
that Kubler-Ross illustrated
because some people really do experience all of them,
sometimes in the order I'll read them,
but again, oftentimes they don't.
The different stages of grief very quickly
are denial, anger, bargaining, depression, and acceptance.
In the Kubler-Ross model,
denial is always the first stage
and denial is just as it sounds,
this disbelief, it cannot be, there's no way,
a refusal to accept the new reality
that the person or animal is gone.
The second stage, anger,
is one in which the individual recognizes
that the person is indeed gone or the animal is gone,
but their body and their mind go into a motivated state.
This is important.
We're going to return to this idea of grief
as a motivated state that involves action plans
in more depth as we go further.
And then the third stage is bargaining,
what's sometimes called the negotiating phase.
This idea that, well, if I had just done this,
or if they had just done that,
or if I'd called more,
or somehow refusing to accept the reality.
So in a way, this can be blended with denial in thinking,
well, if I just don't think about it,
it won't be real, this kind of thing.
So again, stages can be blended or braided together
because emotions are complex, right?
Even though there are different stages to this process,
they can sometimes be melded together.
The fourth stage of depression that Kubler-Ross described
is one of why go on living?
Why should I go on living?
Why should I continue in this grief-stricken state
that seems to deprive me of all the richness of life
that I experienced when the person or animal was still here?
And then the fifth stage is acceptance,
this internalization, not just cognitively,
not just thinking, but emotionally,
that it's going to be okay,
that not just this too shall pass, but that it has passed.
So again, the five stages of grief that Kubler-Ross defined
were immensely important as a critical parsing
of the different stages that one could move through.
But unfortunately, those five stages were sort of taken
to be gospel for a long time.
And we now know based on neuroimaging,
based on more in-depth psychological evaluation,
and frankly, more researchers and clinicians
moving into this area and observing
that while much of what Kubler-Ross described
does hold true, it's not always the case.
And in fact, the contour of the grief process
actually has a lot of dimensions
that are not encapsulated by those five stages.
There's also a lot of variation
depending on whether or not the loss is due to old age,
disease, whether or not there was suffering prior or not,
suicide or non-suicide types, deaths and losses,
and even grief about non-death losses,
a relationship breakup or something of that sort,
or even homesickness and things of that sort.
So I do want to tip our hats to the incredible work
of Elizabeth Kubler-Ross.
By no means am I or do other researchers
try and discount her incredible contributions,
but I think nowadays we have a different
and frankly, a better understanding
of what the grief process is like,
and as a consequence, better tools to move through grief.
In order to really understand what grief is
in your brain and body and how to best navigate grief,
I'd like you to do an experiment with me.
For the next five minutes or so,
I'd like you to at least try to discard
of all prior notions of grief as just a state of sadness.
I want to acknowledge that it is and does involve sadness,
but for right now, let's think about grief
as a motivational state, as a desire for something specific.
In fact, I'd like you to think about grief
as an attempt to reach out and get something
that you very much want.
Imagine yourself extremely thirsty, for instance,
on a very hot day,
and a glass of water is right in front of you,
and it's a beautiful clean glass of water,
and it's completely full,
and you so badly want to drink that water,
but no matter how intensely you want it,
and no matter how hard you try and reach it,
it always shifts just outside your reach.
So if you can imagine that, even just a little bit,
you are touching into the experience of grief.
How do I know this?
Well, I know this because brain imaging studies
involving what's called functional magnetic resonance
imaging, fMRI, in which you can evaluate
which brain areas are more active than others
according to blood flow,
which correlates with neural activity and so forth,
teaches us that the brain areas that are associated
with motivation and craving and pursuit
are some of the primary brain areas and circuits
that are activated in states of grief.
I'd like to share an important paper with you.
It's one of the first to illustrate the fact
that grief is not just a state of sadness and pain.
It is indeed a state of yearning and desire
of something that is just outside your reach
and unfortunately will always be just outside your reach
until you remap your relationship to that person or thing.
The title of this paper is posed first as a question,
so that's why I'll read it as such.
The title is Craving Love.
Enduring Grief Activates Brain's Reward Center.
And the first author of this paper is Mary Frances O'Connor.
She's a professor of psychology
at the University of Arizona and one of the world leaders
in the study of grief from a neuroscience perspective.
With some luck, we'll get her here
on the podcast as a guest.
Now, this paper has several important features.
I'll just highlight a few.
One of the features of this paper that's not surprising
is they found that people who are in a state of grief
are in a state of pain.
That is, brain areas associated with pain,
actual physical pain, are more active
than in non-grieving individuals.
However, they also found that people who are experiencing
what's called complicated grief showed reward-related
activity in a brain area called the nucleus accumbens.
What is reward-related activity?
Reward-related activity is activity of neurons
that's associated with motivational states.
And the nucleus accumbens is a brain center
in which dopamine has the effect
of creating a motivated state.
If ever you thought that dopamine was only associated
with feeling good, you hear about dopamine hits,
well, this paper and papers like it
firmly tell us that dopamine is not about feeling good.
Dopamine is about placing us into a state
of desiring things and seeking things.
This is true in addiction.
This is true when we're hungry and we want to eat.
This is true when we want to reproduce.
This is true in every state in which we are reaching
for something outside our immediate ability
to give that thing to ourselves.
This is very important to understand
if you want to understand grief
and how to move through grief.
Grief is not just about sadness.
It is a state of sadness,
hence the activation of brain areas associated with pain.
And it is a state of desire and reaching for something.
And for those of you that have experienced grief,
I think that will resonate with you.
In that understanding that grief is both a state of pain,
but also a state of wanting,
and in the understanding that when we lose somebody,
either because of breakup or because of death,
or if an animal dies or gets taken away or is missing,
that state of wanting and desire
drives an activation state within us.
Now, the key thing to understand is that the activation
of those reward centers and the involvement of dopamine
puts us into an anticipatory state,
a state of waiting for something to happen.
It also puts us into a state of action or desiring action.
Our body and our mind are what I like to refer to
as center of mass forward.
We are seeking how to resolve the craving,
even if we know that is impossible.
Why do I say that?
Well, we understand also on the basis
of brain imaging studies and also some studies in animals
that I'll describe in a moment,
that in order to understand grief,
we have to understand how attachments
are represented in our brain.
And it turns out that both attachments
and the breaking of attachments in healthy ways
are governed by three important what we call dimensions.
A dimension is just some feature of the world
that's represented in our brain.
So for instance, the color red doesn't exist in your brain.
You happen to have cells, neurons in your eye
that respond best to long wavelengths of light.
And those long wavelengths of light happen to be
what are reflected off things that are perceived as red.
So in your mind, you have a notion of red.
I know this is a little bit abstract,
but you're not actually lighting up red neurons
in your brain and that's why you see red.
You are lighting up neurons in your brain
that represent the presence of red things
in your environment.
Similarly, we have neurons and maps,
or we say representations of other dimensions.
We have dimensions of touch.
We have dimensions of sound.
And as I'll now teach you,
we have three dimensions that define our relationship
to people and animals and things.
And when those people, animals and things
are within our immediate vicinity,
or if we know how we could access them, right?
If somebody is still alive,
there's generally some way to access them
unless they're refusing to interact with us.
Well, when we understand that,
our motivational states can operate in a way that's logical.
We know that for instance,
if we want to find our mother, brother, sister,
significant other, dog, cat, parrot, et cetera,
we have to go through a certain set of steps.
What are those three dimensions and how do they work?
And that's what I'm going to teach you now.
So at risk of sounding a little bit too reductionist,
we are now going to describe your relationship
to anything, everything,
and anyone in these three dimensions.
How can we do that?
Why would we even want to do that?
Why would we want to rob the complexity of relationships
of their contour and their detail?
Well, if we can understand the dimensions
in which we map our relationship to people,
animals and things,
then we can understand why it is
that when those people, animals or things
are not accessible to us, why it hurts so much
and why it takes a certain amount of time
in order to re-understand, if you will,
or remap our association to them.
I promise that in grasping the information
I'm about to give you,
you will be able to better orient in the grief process
and you'll be able to move through it more effectively.
The three dimensions of relating to someone
or an animal or a thing are space, time and closeness.
And in order to illustrate each one
and how they work together to support relationships
and their involvement in the grieving process,
I'm going to tell you about an experiment.
This experiment was actually done.
The experiment involves putting people into a brain scanner
that allows the researcher to evaluate brain activity
in different areas.
In fact, can look in a very non-biased way,
not make any predictions about which brain areas
are going to be involved.
And the experiment is the following.
The person, I should say the research subject,
first sees images of things that reside
at different distances from one another.
And when I say things, these are objects.
So in one case, it's a beach or a parking lot
with bowling balls set at different distances
from one another.
Their brain is imaged and as their brain is imaged,
they see different pictures of different scenes,
the beach, the parking lot, et cetera,
bowling balls spaced in different ways,
close together, far apart, regularly spaced,
non-regularly spaced.
When one does this sort of experiment,
you see a lot of brain areas activated,
not surprisingly the visual cortex,
the area of the brain that is responsible
for creating visual perceptions,
but also a brain area that seems uniquely tuned
to the distance between you and the objects.
So whether or not the bowling balls are far away
or close together from one another,
and whether or not they are far away
or close to you physically.
So literally the distance between you and these objects,
we'll refer to that measure, that dimension,
as we call it as proximity, okay?
Whether or not it's very close to you,
high degree of proximity or far away, low proximity,
but it's simply physical space.
Then subjects listen to tones.
Those tones also are spaced from one another.
So it could be something as simple as my hand meeting
the table top that I'm happen to be sitting in front of.
So it's,
they image the brain.
Of course, areas of the brain they're associated
with auditory perception are active, not surprisingly,
but as they evaluate different types of sounds
and patterns of sounds, for instance,
they can start to parse brain areas that seem uniquely tuned
to the spacing of sounds independent
of what sounds are coming in.
So whether or not it's musical notes
or my hand hitting the table or human speech,
they identified a brain region that is uniquely tuned.
That is, it becomes active specifically in response
to changes in the spacing between sounds,
much in the same way as they could identify brain regions
that were only activated when there were changes
in the distance between objects,
such as the bowling balls that I used
in the previous example.
And then the subjects saw a different set of images.
The images that they saw were of people and of faces.
And some of the images that they saw were
of people's faces right up close.
And other images were of people at a distance
where you could see the whole body of the person.
Now, they also varied the emotional relationship
to those people.
That is, they were able to get photographs
from these research subjects lives.
So they could show them pictures of, for instance,
their sister or some random person off the street.
They could show them pictures of a parent or of a neighbor
or of a celebrity that's well-known
or of somebody that they didn't know at all.
So they were able to vary both the position of the person,
close or far.
And they were able to vary the emotional distance
to the person, which is this dimension
that I'm referring to as closeness,
which is not physical closeness,
but how attached or how well you know somebody.
Now, this is maybe sounding
like a somewhat complicated experiment,
but the takeaway from this experiment is exquisitely simple
and exquisitely important.
The result was that in all three conditions,
changes in the physical spacing of these objects,
changes in the temporal,
that is the time spacing of these sounds
and changes in the emotional distance
between the subject and different people,
the same brain area was uniquely activated.
Now, that is an incredible thing to find
because what it suggests is that, yes, of course,
there are brain areas that are associated
with representation of visual objects.
And that, yes, of course, there are brain areas associated
with representation of different sounds.
And of course, there are brain areas associated with faces.
We now know this.
In fact, there's something called the fusiform face area,
which is uniquely tuned to faces.
But at the same time, there is a unique brain region
that is activated in all three of the conditions I described
that has to do with how far you are from somebody,
both in space, in time, and in terms of emotional closeness.
And that brain area, it turns out,
is a brain area called the inferior parietal lobule.
The inferior parietal lobule.
Now, you don't need to know
where the inferior parietal lobule is.
In fact, you don't even need to know
the name of this brain area.
What you do need to know, however,
if you want to understand grief
and how to move through grief,
is that your map of people is not a map
of emotional closeness per se.
It is a map of emotional closeness,
what we call attachment, that is interwoven,
that is braided in in a very intimate way
with your map of where they are in physical space
and where they are in time,
when you saw them last,
when you're likely to see them again,
and if you were to want to see them,
how much time it would take to reach them
or for them to reach you.
Now, earlier I said that one of the key functions
of our nervous system is to be able to make predictions.
And so it's somewhat obvious,
but nonetheless important to state and restate
that one of the most powerful aspects
of our attachments to people, animals and things,
is our ability to predict
what it would take to see them again
and when we are going to see them again.
In fact, we could say that our ability to locate someone
or an animal or thing in space and time, right?
Where they are and how long it would take
for us to reach them or them to reach us
is a prediction of the requirements
to engage in the attachment.
In order to illustrate this at a little bit more depth,
let's just do a fill in the blank experiment.
You can do this now in real time.
I want you to think of somebody that you either rely on
or that you care about very, very much.
And I'll just allow you to fill in the blank
on this sentence.
If I want to see blank, the person or animal,
I could see them within blank amount of time, right?
If right now you wanted to see this person or animal
or maybe even a thing,
how long would it take you to reach them?
Could be a day, could be a second,
could be there right next to you.
All you'd have to do is turn your head.
Now answer this.
If this person were to travel halfway around the world
and land in their plane,
I would expect to hear from them
within blank minutes of them landing, okay?
The answers of this of course will differ.
Now I'd like you to answer this question.
If I'd like to find myself,
it would take me X amount of time.
And of course, if you're listening to this
and you're understanding it and you're of a rational mind,
the answer to that should be zero seconds, instantaneous.
You are always able to locate yourself in space and time,
provided you are in the appropriate state of mind,
meaning not to sleep for instance.
That last question might seem somewhat silly,
but it's a fundamentally important one
because it illustrates the extremes
at which we map our relationship to ourselves
relative to other people and things.
Now, if all of this sounds like a bunch of neuro psycho
babble parsing of the obvious,
I'd encourage you to suspend that belief for the moment.
Because if you understand that all relationships
are mapped in the brain and body
through these three dimensions,
space, time and closeness or proximity of space,
proximity in time and proximity of attachment,
how close or rich or bonded you are to someone.
Well, if you can understand that,
then it almost becomes obvious,
or at least it becomes intuitive as to why
after the loss of somebody in particular a death
or the loss of an animal, this map has to be reordered.
Why?
Because if we are attached to someone or an animal
at a deep level,
it is almost always on the basis of a lot
of what we call episodic experience.
A lot of episodic memories,
memories of things that happened.
Episodic memories are literally the conscious recollection
of your experience of somebody or an animal or a thing.
And within that memory,
you have an understanding of what has happened with them
in association to you, what's going on with them,
where it happened, when it happened.
You have a rich knowledge database
that we call implicit knowledge, right?
You might not be aware of it all the time,
but it's within you of what this person is like
and what they're doing in their life.
When somebody is taken away from us for whatever reason,
episodic memories persist for some period of time,
and they are still linked to our feelings of attachment.
Grief is the process of uncoupling,
unbraiding and untangling that relationship
between where people are in space, in time,
and our attachment to them.
What I mean by this is when somebody or an animal
or a thing is taken from us,
either by decision or by death or by circumstance,
well, in that case,
our entire memory bank and our ability to predict
where and when they will be,
and therefore when we can feed our attachment to them again,
that whole map is obliterated,
except that the attachment itself has not been disrupted.
Assuming that you are deeply attached to someone
or an animal or a thing, that attachment persists,
and the grief process is one in which you have to reorder
your understanding of them in space and in time.
This is very, very hard to do.
And for some people, it's almost impossible to do,
at least at the outset of grief.
This, in a very neurosciency way,
explains this stage that Kubler-Ross described,
which many, again, not all, but many people experience,
which is one of denial.
How could it be?
Why?
Well, when we have a rich catalog of experiences
with somebody or of them,
ideas about them and what they do,
how they spend their day, what they do and don't do,
where they do it, et cetera,
well, that memory bank is not just flushed out
the moment that we learn that they're no longer with us.
What happens is the brain continues to make
these predictions that they will be in a certain place
or a certain time, right?
That there'll be in a certain time zone
or they'll walk in the door any moment.
All of those predictions still hold.
The neural activity continues.
We call this reverberatory activity.
That explains the yearning for and the desire to interact,
and yet it's just beyond our reach
because once they're gone,
our brain still functions in a way,
these neural circuits still function in a way
that put us into an action state of seeking them,
looking for them in the same location,
expecting them to contact us at whatever frequency
that we were used to hearing from them
or that we could reach out to them
and reliably get a response.
It is immensely disorienting, in other words,
to maintain a close attachment
and at the same time to not be able to make predictions
about where that person and more thing is in space and time.
Now, if this seems somewhat abstract,
I'm going to continue to flesh it out.
And actually right now,
I'd like to flesh it out with a real world example
of grief and loss that comes to us
from perhaps one of the greatest minds in human history
and somebody who was intensely grounded in reality and logic
and indeed the physics of the world.
And the person I'm referring to is none other
than the Nobel prize winning physicist, Richard Feynman.
Many of you are probably familiar with Richard Feynman.
Some of you perhaps are not.
Richard Feynman was a Nobel prize winning physicist
known for his thick New York accent.
He was actually not from Brooklyn, as many people think.
He was actually from Far Rockaway in Long Island.
Thick New York accent, very personable, exceptional teacher,
brilliant mind, hence the Nobel prize in physics.
Also a quite funny and amusing person,
told great anecdotes, et cetera.
Feynman had a childhood sweetheart
who turned out to be his first wife.
Her name was Arlene.
And it was well known that Feynman
was absolutely in love with her.
He would talk about her all the time.
She had a profound influence on him and his thinking
and ultimately on his public education efforts later.
If you haven't already read books such as
surely you're joking, Mr. Feynman,
or what do you care what other people think,
I encourage you to do so.
And in fact, that quote,
what do you care what other people think
is actually a quote, not a Feynman,
but of his first wife, Arlene,
who sadly died at a very young age from tuberculosis.
Why am I sharing Feynman's story
of loss of his first bride?
Well, the reason is Feynman continued to write letters
to Arlene for a long period of time.
This is well known only because after Feynman died,
it was discovered that he kept an archive of letters
to his deceased first wife.
And even though he did eventually marry
and in fact had many relationships with many people,
and I think was married twice more,
maybe it was once, maybe it was twice,
the intensity of his grief,
but also his lack of ability to transition his mind
to a place where he understood that Arlene had died
is one of the more profound examples
of this inability to reconcile the logical world
and the emotional world.
And I'm now going to read to you a letter
that Feynman wrote to Arlene.
This was discovered after Feynman's death
when they went through his desk and his belongings.
And as I read this,
you're going to hear some of the typical narrative of grief
that is not unique to Feynman and his dead wife.
But there are also some elements in there
that I think you'll recognize as highlighting this disbelief
and this dissociation between the reality
of somebody's location in space and time
and the emotional attachment that they hold for us.
And therein lies the information
about how to better navigate grief.
So now I'm reading from the letter.
This was a letter dated October 17th, 1946.
It's not terribly long, but bear with me.
Dear Arlene, I adore you, sweetheart.
I know how much you like to hear that,
but I don't only write it because you like it.
I write it because it makes me warm all over inside
to write it to you.
It is such a terribly long time
since I last wrote to you, almost two years.
But I know you'll excuse me
because you understand how I am, stubborn and realistic.
And I thought there was no sense to writing.
But now I know, my darling wife,
that it is the right thing to do what I've delayed in doing
and that I have done so much in the past.
I wanted to tell you I love you.
I want to love you.
I will always love you.
So here we can hear the intense emotional attachment
that clearly has persisted.
I find it hard to understand in my mind
what it means to love you after you are dead.
But I still want to comfort and take care of you.
And I want you to love me and care for me.
I want to have problems to discuss with you.
I want to do little projects with you.
I never thought until just now that we can do that.
What should we do?
We started to learn to make clothes together
or learn Chinese or getting a movie projector.
Can't I do something now?
No, I am alone without you.
And you were the idea woman and the general instigator
of all our wild adventures.
When you were sick, you worried
because you could not give me something that you wanted.
And you thought I needed.
You needn't have worried.
Just as I told you then there was no real need
because I loved you in so many ways so much.
And now it is clearly even more true.
You can give me nothing now,
yet I love you so that you stand in the way
of my loving anything else.
But I wanted you to stand there.
You dead are so much better than anyone else alive.
So you can really appreciate the depth
and intensity of the attachment.
Despite two years time, it clearly has not waned.
I'll read the final paragraph now.
I know you will assure me that I am foolish
and that you want me to have full happiness
and don't want to be in my way.
I bet you are surprised that I don't even have a girlfriend
except you sweetheart after two years.
But you can't help it darling, nor can I.
I don't understand it for I've met many girls
and very nice ones and I don't want to remain alone.
But in two or three meetings, they all seem ashes.
You only are left to me.
You are real.
My darling wife, I do adore you.
I love my wife.
My wife is dead.
Rich.
P.S., please excuse my not mailing this,
but I don't know your new address.
So there's a lot contained in this letter.
We could parse it line by line,
but I think it's fair to say that clearly
there's an immense attachment that's been maintained.
So that's that dimension of closeness of attachment.
Clearly there's an understanding that she's dead.
In fact, the last line of this love letter
is my wife is dead, right?
He now moves her into the third person, in fact,
in that final line.
So he understands this and yet he maintains the attachment.
And the very last portion of the letter,
the P.S., the postscript,
I don't know your new address, right?
Somewhat humorous in the typical vein
of a Feynman writing or speech.
He always had an intensely amusing
and playful sense of humor.
And yet there's something really contained in this,
I don't think we're reading into this too much,
in that he doesn't know where to find her.
He feels her as very real.
And yet he doesn't know where to find her.
He doesn't know her address.
He obviously knows she's dead,
so there's nowhere to mail it to.
The reason I shared this letter with you,
as opposed to one of the almost infinite number
of other letters that have been written by poets and authors
and scientists and everyday people,
is that it really encapsulates all three dimensions
of attachment and grief.
These notions of space, where is something or somebody?
Time, this dimension of how long would it take me
to reach them or for them to reach me?
What would it take in terms of time to be reunited?
And then that last dimension of closeness.
And the letter beautifully illustrates the fact
that in grief we maintain that sense of closeness
and yet we have to uncouple it
from these other two dimensions,
as we're referring to space and time.
So with this current understanding in mind,
a few things start to become obvious
and entirely normal to us in the best
and most healthy sense of the word normal.
For instance, if you've lost somebody or an animal
or even a thing that was vitally important to you,
it should make perfect sense to you
as to why you keep looking for that person.
I recall this in my own life,
I had the unfortunate circumstance of my graduate advisor
who I was very close with, died quite young, breast cancer.
And her daughter, she has two daughters,
kept her cell phone and would occasionally call me.
I had a quite close relationship to their family.
And when it would come in,
the number would pop up on my phone of not the daughter,
but the name that showed up was of my graduate advisor.
So for years after she died,
my initial impulse when the phone would ring was,
oh my goodness, she's calling.
It was a reflexive excitement
because I truly always enjoyed hearing from her.
She was a wonderful, incredibly wonderful person,
I should say.
Similarly, when somebody passes away,
we will find ourselves looking into a room
expecting to see them there
or expecting them to knock on the door any moment
or to call on Sunday morning, as it were.
Those expectations, those predictions that the brain
is making are entirely normal
because they are based on that deep catalog
of episodic memory that you maintain about that person.
Again, the depth and richness of that catalog scaling,
of course, in direct relation to how close you were
with that person, right?
Closer to somebody means more information about them,
more information about them means your brain
has a lot of implicit, unconscious notions
of when and where and how they show up.
So the fact that your brain,
and indeed sometimes your body,
reacts to the expectation that they'll be there
is entirely normal.
It's simply an activation of this map
that involves closeness, space, and time.
Not surprisingly then, the reordering of that map
that's required in order to move
through the grieving process
is going to involve some remapping.
And you as the person grieving
have the opportunity to ask which node, as it's called,
which element or dimension within that map
are you going to focus on?
Some people really try hard to disengage with
and remap their sense of emotional closeness to the person.
That is, it's so unbelievably overwhelming to them
that the person is no longer accessible,
that they try and change their ideas
about how close they really were.
They try and change their emotional attachment
to the person after they've died.
Clearly in the example that I gave in the Feynman letter,
that's not the case.
The attachment seems indeed quite fixed
and not going anywhere.
Psychologists and neuroscientists generally agree
that the best way to approach moving through grief
is actually to remap these dimensions
while maintaining the close sense of attachment
to the person by not in any way trying to undermine
the intensity of the attachment
or how important it was to you.
So we'll now talk about how that process works
and the different entry points, as they're called,
to engaging in that process.
So one straightforward way to think about
this state of mind and body that we call grief
is that the idea that someone or an animal or a thing
simply does not exist anymore
is not something that the brain can easily conceptualize.
And the reason for that is that we,
as beings that have a brain,
and a brain as an organ that makes predictions,
tends to rely more on experience than knowledge.
In other words, the knowledge that someone or an animal
or a thing is gone, that it doesn't exist,
at least not in the dimensionality
that we were accustomed to relating to them in,
is something that we can understand logically,
but that emotionally is very hard to undo
and from a memory perspective is very hard to undo.
So it's not just that we are in a state
of emotional disbelief, it's that we have neurons,
literally nerve cells and neural circuits,
connections between nerve cells that are dedicated
to this vast implicit knowledge of all the things we know
about that person, animal or thing.
And just because they are no longer in the dimensionality,
meaning in the configuration alive or present in our life
that they were before, doesn't eliminate those memories.
Those memories persist.
And so anytime we call to mind the person's name,
or we call to mind things that remind us of them,
or we suddenly feel the desire to engage with them,
the memories, those episodic implicit memories,
as they're called, all that menu and library of knowledge
slams us straight in the face and pushes us into a mode
of wanting to act in a way that's consistent
with them still being here in the way that all
that knowledge told us they were when we acquired it.
That's a very long-winded way of saying
that there's nothing wrong about the emotional state
when we are in a state of grief.
In fact, quite the opposite.
But there is something wrong about the memories
because the memories are based on our prior knowledge
of them and those memories actually do not apply
to our current knowledge of them.
And again, even though our brain is a prediction machine
and it's a very good one, it's not perfect.
In fact, it's far from perfect.
So really moving through grief is a process
of understanding how relationships are mapped in the brain,
space, time, and closeness, also called attachment,
understanding those three dimensions,
understanding that they are closely linked,
and then understanding that simply the knowledge
that somebody or something or an animal
isn't accessible to us does not allow us to discard
of all the knowledge that we have.
And as a consequence,
our brain is constantly generating expectations
of how to access them,
even if we know that's completely irrational.
Now, this should, I would hope,
assist you in moving through grief.
It's not a tool of the sort of like a switch
that you can flip and suddenly not feel grief,
but it does point to a specific set of mechanisms
or a specific set of steps that you can engage
in order to start to move through the grieving process
in the most adaptive and effective way,
and in a way that still holds in mind
your close attachment to the person.
So let's talk about some of the tools
for adaptively moving through grief.
These are tools gleaned from the research psychology,
the clinical psychology, and the neuroscience literature.
So I've synthesized my understanding
of those three literatures to provide the tools
that I'm about to describe.
The first one involves the acknowledgement
and really the understanding
that you don't want to disengage
or dismantle your real attachment
to someone, an animal, or a thing.
That's a real thing,
and there is actually no adaptive reason
to try and persuade yourself or numb yourself
or somehow avoid the thinking
of just how much they meant to you.
What is important, however,
is that you make some effort to shift your mindset
and your understanding of that person
in a way that holds in mind that yes, indeed,
the attachment is very real,
and in some cases is very, very intense,
but is now going to be uncoupled
from the other two dimensions of the map,
namely space and time.
So again, just to make absolutely clear,
there's no reason to try and convince yourself
that you weren't actually that close to this person
or them to you.
There's no reason to try
and reduce the intensity of that attachment.
To the contrary,
you want to anchor yourself to that attachment,
but you want to make sure that your thoughts
about the person and your feelings
about the person are not oriented toward,
or in reference to, I should say, that map,
that deep catalog of memories that you had.
Now, this is not simply a fancy way
of saying don't live in the past.
This is saying you need to maintain your sense of attachment
but you need to start making predictions
and understanding about how you're going to engage
with that attachment,
how you're going to feel those things
without the expectation that things
that once happened before are going to happen again.
So it's a complicated process, you can imagine,
but you really want to hold and register two things at once.
It's sort of like spinning two plates at once,
and therefore it's going to feel like effort.
One way to do this is to set aside a dedicated period
of time of maybe five or 10,
maybe even as much as 30 minutes,
or depending on your capacity, 30 to 45 minutes,
in which you are going to feel deeply into your closeness
and your attachment to that person, animal, or thing.
But you're consciously going to try and prevent yourself
from thinking about a couple of categories of things.
First of all, you want to actively try and disengage
from any attempt to engage
in what's called counterfactual thinking, the what-ifs.
What if I had called them a day earlier?
What if they had taken a different route home?
What if I had taken a different route home?
These counterfactual modes of thinking
are an infinite landscape of possibility,
and they are very closely tied to guilt.
Guilt is an interesting emotion.
We should probably do an entire episode about guilt.
But guilt, as defined by psychologists and neuroscientists,
is actually a way of assigning ourselves more agency,
more capability of controlling reality than actually exists.
And it's a very slippery slope, and I want to be clear,
it's not the case that guilt
is never an appropriate response,
but in the context of grieving, guilt is very precarious
because in thinking I could have done this,
or if I had only done that,
you are essentially exploring an infinite landscape
of things that you can never refute.
You will never know that had you not gone
down a different path,
or they had not taken a particular path in life
that things would have turned out different,
but you can't know that it would have worked as well,
meaning you actually don't know that your what-ifs are true
and you don't know that they're not true.
And so as an infinite space, it's a very precarious one,
and it will not allow you to uncouple
that intense emotional attachment
that I'm telling you is actually vital to hold onto
from that catalog of episodic memory that you've established.
In fact, it's going to strengthen those bonds.
So in this dedicated five or 10 or 30,
whatever period of time you can tolerate
and maintain focus,
the idea is to think about your attachment in a rich way
and to perhaps even experience that in your brain and body.
I think if you're in a stage of grief
that actually will be fairly reflexive to do,
but to try as much as possible to hold that grief
in the present and to be connected
to your immediate physical environment.
So you want to orient yourself in current space and time
rather than focus on memories
or what you would have liked to see happen
or the wish that they were still there
while at the same time thinking about the depth
and richness of that attachment.
This is obviously a tight rope walk, so to speak.
It's an emotionally challenging
and sometimes even will be experienced
as a physically challenging tool or experience.
But in our understanding of how attachments
and grief are represented in the brain,
this can be an immensely beneficial practice
because it is the first step.
And indeed it represents many of the steps in the voyage
from the initial shock of loss
to our ability to hold in mind somebody
or an animal or a thing in a way that still allows us
to feel the depth and fullness of connection to them
without feeling the yearning,
that reaching for the glass of water
that unfortunately will never be resolved.
Keep in mind that as you embark on this process,
it is entirely normal for your mind
to flip into various states of expectation
that they're suddenly going to be there.
In fact, because of the closeness
of these three dimensions in the map,
space, time and attachment,
it's entirely normal that when you start to think
about your attachment to somebody or an animal or a thing,
that you almost start to experience them
as present in that environment.
I'll share with you a somewhat bizarre
or it sounds bizarre to articulate out loud,
but many of you perhaps will resonate with this.
For years after my graduate advisor died,
I would get an experience of someone touching the back
of my neck when I would think about her.
And that was not an experience I ever had with her, right?
It was a professional relationship.
I don't ever recall her touching the back of my neck
or me touching the back of my neck in her presence,
at least not on a regular basis.
So it was very perplexing to me.
And then I encountered this incredible literature on grief,
which said the following.
Grief in many ways is like a phantom limb.
For those of you that aren't familiar,
many people who experience amputation of a limb,
either through surgery or accident or otherwise,
will feel in a very genuine way
that the limb is still present,
even though when they look for the limb, it's not there.
So they can feel pain in limbs.
They can feel the sensation of touch.
There's some famous experiments from the neurologist
and my former colleague at University of California,
San Diego, who goes by his last name, Ramachandran.
Some people just call him Rama.
He's an incredible scientist
and has done a lot of really important work,
in particular on phantom limb, among other things.
And has done some beautiful experiments
showing that people who have phantom limb pain
or that are experiencing different sensations
in their phantom limb, that can be very intrusive,
much in the same way that expecting someone
to walk through the door who you happen to know is deceased
can be very intrusive.
Ramachandran's done beautiful experiments
showing that if you give people what's called a mirror box,
this is a box in which you insert an intact limb,
and there are some mirrors that give you the visual impression
that the other limb is still present,
and you move the intact limb
and you get a mirror image of the non-existent,
but nonetheless visual image of the phantom limb moving,
that you can resolve some of the pain of a limb
that feels otherwise cramped up.
In other words, the visual perception
can reverse some of these phantom sensations.
In many ways, the phantom limb scenario
and what I described about a sensation
of being touched on the back of the neck
or this feeling that we have when we engage in the thinking
and the emotions of our attachment
to someone, an animal, or a thing
is very much like a phantom limb,
only it exists in the emotional space,
and it exists because it is reactivation
of these maps about space, time, and person.
And so if the process of moving through grief adaptively
in a healthy way involves maintaining the attachment,
but uncoupling that attachment
from the space and time representation of that person,
animal, or thing that we had before,
well, then the question becomes,
where should we place our expectation of them, right?
Now, that of course will vary from person to person.
Some people with particular religious beliefs
will indeed believe that the soul of the person,
the molecules of the person have been reordered
and exist in some sort of either distributed domain, right?
That they are in everything or they are in one location.
I'm not here to speak to that one way or the other.
There's no good experiment I know
either to prove or disprove that, nor would I want to.
It's not the job of science, frankly.
However, allowing ourselves to place notions
of where that person, animal, or thing is
in their current new configuration, whatever that might be,
ashes, dashes, dust to dust,
or that the person's soul comes out of their body,
these are all the different variations
that people hear, or some people think,
well, it's just molecules and they disintegrate
and are reordered and come up as the plants and the trees.
Again, a near infinite number of possibilities
and it depends a lot on personal belief.
It is, however, essential that no matter what you believe,
that you have some firm representation
of where that person, animal, or thing is
so that you can plug it into this map,
this three-dimensional map of space, time, and attachment.
The process of moving through grief
can't simply be that we hold onto the attachment
and we discard with any understanding
of where they are in space and time.
And actually, the letter that Feynman wrote
to his deceased wife, Arlene,
again, so beautifully and really poignantly
illustrates the fact that he doesn't really know
where to find her.
On the one hand, he really understands that she's gone
and on the other hand, he understands
that he still very much expects her to be there,
that he would like to mail the letter,
but then, of course, in this final, somewhat humorous line,
he doesn't know where to send the letter, he tells us.
What's very clear and I think is very healthy
is the fact that the emotional bond is still there,
that that is maintained.
And so this tool, if you will, of dedicated blocks of time
for really spending some effort,
and it is indeed effort to access the emotional connection
while starting to uncouple the other nodes of the map,
as it were, is something that is hard.
You should expect it to be hard,
but in terms of the options one has
in order to deal with grief,
it is indeed the most adaptive way to go about it.
You're not trying to avoid thinking about it.
You're not engaging in this counterfactual thinking,
the what if, what if, what if.
You're not drowning it out with substances
or delusion or with other ways of distracting yourself.
So in that sense, it is truly adaptive.
Now, of course, I don't want to imply
that I'm a clinical psychologist, I'm certainly not.
There is absolutely a place
for working with a trained professional
to move through grief, especially these situations,
these one in 10 people who deal
with what's called complicated grief
or very prolonged grief.
Those are somewhat different things,
but in general point to the fact
that there are people who have an exceptionally hard time
moving through grief.
We'll talk about who those people are
and ways to move through them
with or without a professional to assist you.
But nonetheless, we're starting to understand
on the basis of neuroscience,
what some of the more adaptive and functional ways
of moving through grief are.
In order to really understand how a tool of the sort
that we're describing ought to work
and what it's designed to accomplish at a mechanistic level,
I'd like to teach you about a very important aspect
of your brain function that has everything to do with grief
and the process of moving through grief,
but has a lot to do with other aspects
of our life experience as well.
Some of you are probably familiar
with a brain area called the hippocampus.
The hippocampus is a structure that's involved
in the formation of new memories,
but not the maintenance of memories.
I discussed the hippocampus in detail
in our episode on memory and our episode
with our guest, Dr. Wendy Suzuki from New York University,
an expert on learning and memory.
During those two discussions,
I did not however touch into what the different cell types
are in the hippocampus and the different roles they perform.
And it turns out that there are indeed different cell types
in the hippocampus and they performed very different roles
that are absolutely central to the grief process.
We have cells in our hippocampus,
meaning you have cells in your hippocampus.
These cells are neurons, nerve cells that fire anytime or,
and when we say fire, I should just remind you.
I mean, have electrical activity.
Anytime that we enter a particular familiar location.
So for instance, think about your bedroom
and think about where the bed is.
As you're doing that, these so-called place cells are firing
not necessarily to represent that it's a bed
at that location, but to represent the location itself.
We also have neurons in our hippocampus
and elsewhere in our brain, I should say,
that represent proximity.
So for instance, if you were to wake up
in the middle of the night and walk into the kitchen
and it's somewhat dark and you orient toward the sink
to get yourself a glass of water or to the refrigerator
to get yourself something to drink or to eat,
as you get close to the sink or the refrigerator,
there are neurons in your hippocampus
that are going to start engaging electrical activity
because you are in the mere expected proximity
of the sink or refrigerator and you know where they are,
hence the word expected.
Now that all seems fine and good.
You've got neurons that represent where things are
and sort of goes without saying that those same neurons
map to our emotional attachments.
We generally know where to find our loved ones,
even if they don't live with us,
we generally know what city they're in.
Even if they're traveling,
we generally have a sense of where they're traveling
or the general area in which they're traveling.
Place cells and proximity cells are involved
in that kind of mapping and representations as well.
Now there's a third kind of cell
that's particularly important for the sort of tool
that we were talking about earlier,
that tool of holding onto the emotional attachment
to somebody and yet trying to deliberately
remap our understanding of where they are
in space and time.
And that has to do with a category of cells
called trace cells.
Trace cells were discovered by a number of laboratories.
I think the most renowned of those is the Moser Laboratory.
The Mosers are a couple, actually,
they were a couple, they're now,
I think amicably separated or divorced.
That's not what this episode's about.
If I have that wrong, forgive me,
Edvard and Brittan are their names.
Their relationship isn't what's important,
except what is important is the work that they did together
in one form or another,
which was very important work establishing
this category of cells in the,
not just in the hippocampus,
but in an area of the brain called the entorhinal cortex
that act as a sort of coordinate system
to orient us in space and time.
Trace cells are activated when we expect something
to be at a given location, but it's not there.
Experiments done in their laboratory
and in other laboratories have shown that, for instance,
if you give a rodent or frankly a person,
a object that always resides at the same location
and we reach to it in order to access it,
let's say where your coffee maker is in the morning.
I do a pour over coffee.
If I'm drinking coffee or mate, I'll do a pour over.
It's always more or less in the same location.
And so there are place cells and proximity cells
that relate to my being able to find
that pour over coffee cone thing.
However, if I were to go to that location
and it wasn't there, the trace cells,
these neurons in my hippocampus
and an entorhinal cortex and elsewhere,
because again, these cells are connected
by way of circuitry, by way of connections,
those trace cells would fire.
We could even call it a trace circuit.
It's a circuit that has an expectation
that something will be in a location,
but when something is not at that location,
this circuit becomes active.
This is important because what we're talking about here
is a neural circuit and a set of neurons
that are responsible not for the presence of something,
but the absence of something.
We have every reason to believe
based on neuroimaging studies and studies in animal models,
that trace cells become very active in the immediate stage
after the loss of a loved one.
That the brain and our maps of the person, place, or thing
that we know cognitively, we understand,
we even believe they are gone.
They are not accessible for whatever reason,
death or otherwise.
And yet we have neurons that are firing
to reveal that absence to us.
And these neurons are closely associated with neurons
that tell us where things ought to be.
So if you feel the expectation or you sense
that somebody should walk through the door any moment
or call at any moment or be next to you when you wake up,
and yet you cognitively understand that they won't,
that there's no real reason why they should
because they are indeed gone, you are not crazy.
In fact, it's simply a reflection of the normal functioning
of these trace cells and trace circuits.
Now I'd like to consider why two people,
both who are intensely attached to a person
that is no longer there can experience the grief
of the loss of that person in such different ways.
This is often observed.
You can have, you know, God forbid, incredibly sadly,
in cases where a child is lost,
where both parents are grieving intensely,
but one seems to feel it at a emotional depth and level
that seems distinct from the other.
Now, of course, keep in mind
that we never really know how other people are feeling.
This is something actually that was raised in the episode
where I interviewed a psychiatrist
and researcher colleague of mine from Stanford,
Carl Deisseroth.
As a psychiatrist, I heard him say once
that we really don't know how other people feel.
In fact, a lot of the times we don't even really know
how we feel, or at least describing that
is quite challenging with language often.
And indeed that is the case.
We don't really know how other people feel.
There's no clear way of knowing
that the expression someone else has
or whether or not they're crying or not,
or their body language really represents
how they feel inside.
So that is important to keep in mind.
Nonetheless, there does seem to be a sort of a split
among people and indeed among animals as well,
even within a species in terms of how intensely they feel,
the yearning aspect of grief.
And it appears based on a number of different lines
of evidence that that relates to this molecule
that some of you have probably heard of, which is oxytocin.
Oxytocin is a hormone slash peptide.
A peptide just means a protein, generally a small protein.
And a hormone is generally something
that functions at numerous locations in the body
to impact numerous organs and areas of the brain.
So a peptide can be a hormone and a hormone can be a peptide.
They are not mutually exclusive.
Oxytocin has a variety of roles in the brain and body.
It's involved in milk let down during lactation.
It's involved in pair bonding, both in males and females.
It's involved in bonding of parent to child
and indeed between romantic partners, et cetera, et cetera.
Let's talk about some of the animal models that inform us
about the potential roles of oxytocin
in the grieving process.
There's a species of animal called the prairie vole.
And believe it or not, the prairie vole
has been studied fairly extensively
by neuroscience and psychology researchers.
In fact, our former director
of the National Institutes of Mental Health, Tom Insel,
his laboratory focused quite heavily on prairie voles.
Prairie voles are one species of animal,
but depending on where they live,
you find that some prairie voles are monogamous.
That is, they mate with the same prairie vole for life.
They raise litters of little prairie voles for life
and other prairie voles generally
that live in different locations in the wild
are non-monogamous, sometimes called polygamous.
The neurochemical and circuit basis
for this monogamy versus non-monogamy are quite interesting.
However, in the context of grief and attachment,
the prairie voles have taught us a lot
and they've taught us a lot
through the following experiment.
Take two prairie voles that are coupled up,
so these would be monogamous prairie voles
that have established a couple-dom.
I guess you would call that a prairie vold-dom, anyway.
Put them in a cage together, they mate together,
they raise young together, and then you separate them.
You literally put a physical barrier
between the two of them and you can evaluate
how strongly one prairie vole will work
to get access to the other prairie vole, right?
This is sort of the Romeo and Juliet
of prairie vole experiments.
And what you observe is that the monogamous prairie voles
will work very hard to get back to their mate,
to get access to their mate.
They will lever press, they'll even walk across
a metal plate that they get an electrical shock.
They will work very, very hard.
They will cross rivers and valleys, if you will,
in the experimental context, that is.
The polygamous prairie voles, and again,
we don't know if they're polyamorous,
we don't know what they feel, right?
We don't know if they're in love
or if they're motivated simply for other things,
but the non-monogamous prairie voles
will not work as hard to access a prairie vole partner.
Now, you could argue that's because they expect
that there will be other prairie vole partners,
but even if they've never experienced another prairie vole
partner, they won't work quite as hard to get back
in connection with this other prairie vole
to mate or otherwise.
This turns out to be interesting
when you start to explore the patterns
of so-called oxytocin receptors in the brain.
To make a long story short,
and to also bridge to the human literature,
it turns out that the monogamous prairie voles
have far more oxytocin receptors in this brain area
that I mentioned earlier, the nucleus accumbens.
And again, to remind you, the nucleus accumbens
is a brain area associated with motivation,
craving, and pursuit.
So it's as if the monogamous prairie voles
have a capacity to link the attachment circuitry
and the molecules of attachment, in this case, oxytocin,
to reward pathways and to motivational pathways.
Polygamous, or we should say non-monogamous prairie voles
do as well.
However, they have less oxytocin receptors.
So in other words, non-monogamous prairie voles
seem to have less yearning for attachment overall,
at least to a single individual prairie vole.
And when we look at the human literature
in terms of oxytocin receptor expression
and brain imaging experiments and so on,
what you find is the same.
The people that experience intense grief
and a deep yearning and a motivation to reconnect
with the person, animal, or thing that is lost,
in many cases have heightened levels of oxytocin,
specifically, or I should say oxytocin receptors
to be exact, specifically within the brain regions
associated with craving and pursuit.
So for those of you that find yourself
in this kind of stuck mode,
this persistence of trying to reach into the past
or wishful thinking, this counterfactual thinking,
if only, if only, if only,
you don't necessarily want to pathologize that thinking.
First of all, we should acknowledge
that it's not necessarily adaptive.
And in fact, in the complete loss of somebody,
or if somebody says they don't want anything to do
with you ever again, by all means,
if that's expressed clearly,
then you need to accept that reality.
But the yearning, the desire, and the impulsivity,
the kind of leaning in and at a almost reflexive way
to try and access that person again,
to text them, to want to hear from them could,
and I have to highlight could reflect the fact
that you just so happen to have more oxytocin receptors
or maybe more oxytocin overall in this brain area
that's associated with motivation and pursuit.
It does not necessarily mean that you are more capable
of attachment than people who move
through grief more quickly.
And I should say that people move through grief
at different rates, even if two people lost the same person
or same animal, people move through this at different rates.
And some of that is no doubt psychological,
but some of it no doubt is also neurochemical
and biological.
And in sharing this with you,
I hope it sheds some understanding
and perhaps even some compassion for people
who are moving through things more quickly
or in a different way.
And of course, it should also, I would hope,
shed compassion and understanding for people
that seem incapable of quote unquote, moving on.
It's taking them far longer to move on.
Earlier, we talked about complicated grief,
non-complicated grief and prolonged grief disorder.
And I should say that the precise divisions
between these categories is not very precise.
It takes a really trained expert to be able to identify
whether or not somebody is
in the prolonged grief disorder category,
complicated or non-complicated grief.
There's actually a set of questionnaires
that I invite you to answer if you like.
They were provided, or I should say I access them
through a public site on Mary Frances O'Connor's webpage.
We'll put them in the show note captions.
You actually can submit those answers in an anonymous way
to a study that she's doing.
She has several surveys,
one for loss of a romantic relationship,
other for loss due to death of somebody,
and still another one that relates to homesickness.
And it's also available in several different languages.
So I provide a link to that website.
It's very easy to download.
There's no cost to that at all.
You can contribute to the scientific data collection process
if you like.
And I do believe that you get your scores back
or an interpretation of your scores by participating there.
When Mary Frances O'Connor hopefully comes on the podcast,
she can tell us some more of the detail
about separating out this prolonged grief disorder,
complicated and uncomplicated grief.
But in the meantime,
it's very clear that people move through grief
at different rates.
And as I mentioned just a moment ago,
that this is entirely normal,
probably has a basis in neurochemicals
and hormones such as oxytocin.
There are probably other reasons as well.
In fact, we can assume with almost certainty
that there are other reasons as well.
Nonetheless, I think it is really important to think about
why some people might have a harder time
moving through grief due to life circumstance,
innate differences and so on.
There's a very nice set of studies,
but one in particular entitled
Catecholamine Predictors of Complicated Grief Outcomes.
Here again, the first author is Mary Frances O'Connor
reminding us that she's done so much important work
in this area.
This paper has several conclusions,
but one of the key conclusions
is that this particular category of molecules
we call the catecholamines.
The catecholamines include epinephrine,
which is also adrenaline,
norepinephrine, which is noradrenaline
and dopamine, which you've learned about before.
Here I'm just going to paraphrase
or I'll read directly actually.
What they found was that participants,
again, this is human subjects,
with the highest levels of epinephrine,
of adrenaline pre-treatment,
had the highest levels of complicated grief symptoms
post-treatment and that could account
for their baseline level of symptoms.
What this means is that people
that have a lot of circulating adrenaline,
we might even call these people who are
or typically reside at a higher level of autonomic arousal.
We have an autonomic nervous system
that dictates how calm or alert or stressed
we happen to be just at baseline.
People who tend to be more alert and anxious at baseline
prior to any grief episode tend to have,
or statistically on average we should say,
are more likely to experience complicated grief
and maybe even prolonged grief symptoms.
So if you're somebody that is anticipating losing someone
or an animal or a thing at some point,
and I think that really means everybody,
utilizing tools to adjust your epinephrine,
your adrenaline levels down has a number
of important benefits, improving sleep,
health metrics, et cetera.
There are tools to do that.
We have an episode on mastering stress
that you can find at our website,
humanlab.com, it has a lot of behavioral tools
that are backed by science.
Some of work that was done in my laboratory,
but certainly other laboratories as well
that will allow you to control your autonomic nervous system
both in real time and reduce the overall level of stress
and even chronic activation of the so-called sympathetic arm
of the autonomic nervous system,
which is just fancy geek speak for saying,
there are tools to help you be calm,
not just for sake of navigating daily stress,
but as this paper illustrates,
for anticipating the fact that at some point
you will lose somebody, an animal or a thing.
And there is a way to move through that process
that we call healthy normal grieving.
And then there's the so-called complicated grief
or prolonged grief disorders that reflect immense challenge
in moving through grief at a reasonable rate.
So you can somewhat inoculate yourself
against complicated or prolonged grief
by reducing your resting levels of,
or your pre-loss levels of epinephrine, of adrenaline.
And again, there are excellent tools to do that.
I won't review them here for sake of time,
but they're timestamped and you can access those easily.
Again, zero cost tools.
Going back to this paper,
catecholamine predictors
of complicated grief treatment outcomes
should say that not only did participants
with the highest levels of adrenaline
have the highest levels of complicated grief symptoms
post-treatment, but the predictive relationship
between these two things, adrenaline and complicated grief,
was not seen in depression.
And I find that incredibly interesting
because it further separates depression from grieving
and grieving from depression.
A resounding theme again and again,
grieving is not depression
and depression is not necessarily grieving.
They can co-exist, but they are separable as well
and indeed reflect separate brain circuitries entirely.
So the conclusion they draw is that the present study
supports the hypothesis that catecholamine levels,
again, epinephrine, dopamine, norepinephrine,
are the catecholamines, are affected by bereavement
and in turn can affect the ability of those
with complicated grief to benefit from psychotherapy.
So what does all this mean?
What this means is we can prepare ourselves
to be in a better state to access,
yes, access grief when it's appropriate.
And indeed grief is the appropriate response
when we lose someone, an animal or a thing
that we are closely attached to.
And yet to be able to move through that at a pace
and in a way that is most adaptive for us.
And to just again highlight what adaptive means,
it does not mean dissociating from the attachment
to the person, animal or thing.
I just want to pause for a second
and mention why I keep repeating person, animal or thing.
I'm saying that because while grieving the loss of a person
or a relationship with a person doesn't have to be
through death, of course, but death or otherwise
is something that we all can intuitively understand
even if we haven't experienced it.
We are capable of achieving great attachments
to animals as well.
And while the loss of a thing of an object
in no way, shape or form approximately
the loss of a person or an animal,
I would never suggest that it does.
It would also be naive and unfair of me
or anyone else to suggest that things can't hold
immense importance to us and that the loss of them
can feel quite significant and invoke the grieving process.
This isn't always about materialism.
Sometimes it's purely about the sentimental attachment.
So for instance, the loss of a wedding ring
or an engagement ring that was very meaningful to you
or an article of clothing or a painting
or even a small, seemingly an important object
to somebody else, but something that held great meaning
to you, maybe a seashell that you collected with somebody
on the beach and then somehow it gets lost.
And it's the relationship with that person
that's contained within that object for you
as a representation within that object that's important.
That's the reason why I keep saying person, animal or thing.
I think it's only fair to include things in that category.
But of course, with the understanding that they don't hold
the absolute same magnitude as the loss of a being.
One thing that we ought to consider for a moment
is whether or not the depth of attachment
that you have to somebody predicts how long it will take
for you to move through the loss of that person.
We often hear this.
Actually, I can remember some years ago
at the end of a relationship,
a friend and colleague of mine saying,
for every year that you were together,
it's going to take you one month to get over that person.
And I thought, where in the world do those data come from?
And this is what I call anic data or collective data,
where this is like phrases such as,
absence makes the heart grow fonder.
And indeed, sometimes absence can make the heart grow
fonder in the context of two living people
or people in a loving relationship,
or even in the context of grief and loss.
But of course, there's absence makes the heart grow fonder.
And then you also will hear out of sight, out of mind.
And if you've been listening to this episode,
clearly out of sight does not mean out of mind
or out of emotional connection.
So these sayings of, well, it takes X number of months
for a number of years, or out of sight, out of mind,
or absence makes the heart grow fonder.
They really don't hold a lot of meaning,
at least not for somebody like me who likes science,
because science is at least geared toward
or aims towards establishing things in fact, not opinion,
but also because science allows you to make predictions.
It allows you to orient yourself in a process
and make predictions and understand.
So what are we to think of people
who seem very, very attached to somebody,
they break up and they seem just crushed, devastated,
but three weeks later, they're in a new relationship
and they seem perfectly fine.
Or somebody whose spouse dies
and then suddenly they're in a new relationship.
I think there are rates of transition, if you will,
that suggests some dysfunction, pathology, et cetera.
But here we aren't in a position to judge,
we're only in a position to speculate about this.
And I think we can reasonably speculate
that it sort of makes sense
why someone who has an intense attachment to somebody
might be able to form intense attachments generally, right?
That they aren't restricted to one person,
whereas other people who have an intense attachment
to somebody might find themselves entirely incapable
of moving on, or it would take them a very long time.
Hence the lines in the Feynman letter to Arlene
about he had met various other young women,
they seem perfectly nice,
and yet they were meaningless to him
in the shadow of her memory,
or we should say in the light of Arlene's memory
or the memory of Arlene rather.
So these dimensionalities of attachment,
they cut in every direction.
And I don't think any well-trained psychologist
or neuroscientist would ever say,
oh, if you are somebody who becomes very attached,
therefore it's very hard to move on.
I think that could be true.
It could also be that if you're somebody
who has a great capacity for attachment,
you have a great capacity for attachment overall.
Neuroscience nor psychology
is really in a position to judge, certainly,
but it's also not in a position
to make those kinds of predictions.
At least the field as it stands right now
of attachment and grieving
can't really speak to why that's the case.
So that's my attempt to de-pathologize
some of what we observe,
although I have to confess from a just sort of
everyday stance that sometimes the rate
in which people move out of attachments and grieving
can be somewhat eerie.
I'd like to take a moment and explore this idea
that allowing ourselves to really feel
the attachment to somebody can accelerate
or at least support adaptive transitioning through grief.
There's a really wonderful study that on the face of it
appears to be what we call negative result.
A negative result is when a hypothesis is posed
and then turns out the hypothesis is not true.
But as is the case with so many
interesting scientific findings,
often when there's a negative result,
there's a more interesting result
nested in that negative outcome.
And this is the case in a particular paper
I'll share with you now.
There's a paper published in the journal
Biological Psychology.
And again, the title is posed as a question,
which is emotional disclosure for whom?
A study of vagal tone in bereavement.
What this study explored was
whether or not written disclosure
of the emotional connection to somebody that was lost
would be effective as a way for people
to move through the grieving process.
The study also explored the so-called vagus nerve.
The vagus nerve is an extensive nerve pathway
that is bi-directional between brain and body.
So brain to body and body to brain.
It generally is associated with calming effects
on our brain and body,
although that's certainly not always the case.
The way to think about it
in terms of what we're going to talk about now
is heart rate and heart rate variability.
And in very simplistic terms,
if your heart was just allowed to beat
at its sort of default rate,
that rate would be rather high
because of the activation of the so-called sympathetic arm
of the autonomic nervous system,
the alertness component of the autonomic nervous system.
The parasympathetic nervous system as it's called
involves calming.
We sometimes hear sympathetic is for stress
or fight or flight.
It's for a lot of other things as well, I should mention,
and it is not for sympathy.
Simpa simply means together,
and it reflects the activity of a bunch of neurons
being active at the same time or together, simpa.
Whereas parasympathetic is often associated
with quote unquote rest and digest functions
or calming functions,
although it is certainly involved in other things as well.
So sympathetic nervous system drives alertness,
panic, stress, et cetera.
Parasympathetic nervous system,
meaning a distinct set of neurons drive calming,
falling asleep, digestion,
sexual arousal for that matter, and so on.
So you sort of like a seesaw of alertness and calm,
alertness and calm,
sympathetic and parasympathetic, back and forth.
The vagus nerve is generally associated
with parasympathetic functions
and has the capacity to slow down our heart rate,
in particular by exhales.
And just simply because of the movement of the diaphragm
and its relationship to the heart and the thoracic cavity,
exhales result in slowing down of the heart rate.
This is what we call an increased vagal tone.
So let me explain for a moment.
And actually here's a tool you can use,
not just in terms of navigating grief,
but in terms of stress modulation generally.
We have a muscle called the diaphragm.
When we inhale, whether or not it's through our mouth
or nose, our diaphragm moves down.
As a consequence, there is more space overall
in the thoracic cavity.
The heart gets a little bit bigger,
believe it or not, volume-wise.
Blood flows more slowly through that large volume.
And there's a signal conveyed from the nervous system
to the heart to speed the heart up.
So inhales literally speed your heart up.
And when you exhale, the diaphragm moves up.
And as a consequence,
there's less space in the thoracic cavity.
Heart gets a little bit smaller.
The existing blood volume in the heart at that time
moves more quickly through that small volume, right?
Given amount of blood volume,
make the compartment it's in the heart smaller,
and the blood moves more quickly through that volume.
And as a consequence, the nervous system sends a signal
to the heart via the vagus and other pathways
to slow the heart down.
In other words, exhale, slow the heart down.
That process, that relationship between inhale,
speeding the heart up and exhale, slowing the heart down
is something called respiratory sinus arrhythmia.
Some people are able to engage respiratory sinus arrhythmia
more naturally, more reflexively than others.
You can actually train this by consciously thinking
about slowing your heart rate while you exhale
and consciously thinking about increasing your heart rate
as you inhale.
You can literally strengthen these pathways.
Now, respiratory sinus arrhythmia
and the ability to slow your heart rate with exhales
is one dimension of what's called vagal tone
or your ability to control your overall level
of activation of alertness and stress
with these vagus nerve pathways.
So vagal tone is something that varies
from person to person.
If you've trained up or you've thought about
your relationship between breath and heart rate,
you can improve vagal tone.
Some people have very robust vagal tone
without having done any training.
Other people have less of it, et cetera.
I'll just paraphrase from this paper
and you'll see where this takes us
in terms of navigating grief because it's quite important.
The vagus nerve provides inhibitory regulatory influence
on the heart, allowing the heart rate to increase rapidly
through vagal withdrawal.
That means kind of coming off the brake
of the parasympathetic nervous system
as in response to a stressor in one's environment, right?
When you're stressed, you rarely take the opportunity
if it's an immediate stress or threat to actively exhale.
That would be a great tool to use.
In fact, we promote that tool
in our Mastering Stress episode.
Vagal withdrawal usually co-occurs
with an increase in sympathetic activation of the heart.
You now know what that is
or is known as the fight or flight response.
Vagal tone reflects the degree to which there is tonic,
meaning ongoing, vagal influence on the heart.
So when you have a high degree of vagal tone,
it means that you are always activating that brake
on your stress system, just at default.
And some people just happen to do that more.
Other people need to practice long exhale breathing
in order to build up vagal tone,
something that's very useful to do
whether you're grieving or not.
Now, in this study, what they did
is they had people, and I should say it was 35 participants,
go through a writing exercise for a period of weeks.
They actually wrote about three times per week.
Then there was a follow-up at some period of time
and then again about a month later.
And there were two different groups.
One group was in the so-called written disclosure group.
What they did is they, on day one,
they would write about what happened when a loved one died.
And indeed they used people who had experienced real loss.
And so they were asked to talk about
and write about their deepest emotions
and thoughts about it, memories of their loved one,
very intense stuff if you think about it,
if they're in the immediate period of having lost someone.
Then they actually were asked to write a letter
to the person that they lost.
So again, a very intense exercise to go through
if you did indeed lose somebody as these subjects had.
And then of course there was the testing
some period of time later.
And I'll tell you what that testing involved.
The other group was a so-called control group
where they were simply told to write
about how they use their time.
So an emotionally kind of empty writing exercise,
if you will.
They described what they would do today
after they woke up, et cetera.
No heavy emotional content and so on.
Now, as I mentioned earlier,
the immediate results of this study were a negative result,
meaning no effect.
The disclosure that we should say
the emotionally intense writing group
and the control group did not differ at baseline
on any symptom measures
or psychological variables they tell us.
And at least at face value, somewhat disappointingly,
there really wasn't any kind of difference in outcome
between the group that wrote
about a very emotionally intense stuff
versus non-emotionally intense.
Now, what I didn't tell you thus far
is why they had them do this exercise at all.
They had them do this exercise
because many of the effective practices
for moving through grief involve, as I mentioned earlier,
getting close to and actually deliberately experiencing
the attachment that one has to that person that was lost,
not distracting oneself,
not getting into this counterfactual thinking,
the what if, what if, what if,
but rather thinking about, or in this case,
writing about the real attachment.
And so the initial idea was
if people write about this attachment,
that they're going to experience this attachment
and that will serve them in some or many ways
in terms of moving through grief.
And that wasn't what they found.
They found no difference between the two groups
until they explored who had higher vagal tone,
who had a greater degree
of so-called respiratory sinus arrhythmia.
In other words, who was able to modulate their state
using their breathing and their body.
And what they discovered was that a subset of individuals
who had a high degree of vagal tone
seemed to get more benefit from this writing type exercise.
Now, this is one study and I would consider it
fairly preliminary with 35 subjects.
Although, you know, it's a study into itself
and I think a quite nice one.
And it really set the stage for a number of other studies
that followed from this group and other groups
that really point to the fact that yes, indeed,
accessing these states of emotionality
by writing or thinking about somebody is quite powerful
in terms of engaging the bodily states
and the mind states associated with the attachment.
And that is very beneficial for moving through grief.
That is very beneficial for sensing the attachment.
And now it makes perfect sense as to why some people
would benefit from that sort of practice more than others,
because some people are able to access
more real somatic feelings of attachment
by writing about the attachment
or by thinking about it than others.
So this brings us back to an earlier discussion
we were having where we were talking about
how some people seem to move through things very quickly
or don't seem to be grieving constantly.
And, you know, a spouse or a family member of that person
might think, gosh, why aren't you upset?
How is it that you can be functional and I'm not?
Or how is it that you can be functional?
There can even be fractures in families and relationships
on the basis of differences in rates of grieving and so on.
Well, some of this, again, probably relates to psychology
and the different attachments that people had
to the person or animal or thing that was lost,
but it no doubt also has to do
with how much of a mind-body connection,
how much vagal tone exists in the person
when they suddenly found themselves in the grief episode.
So this actually offers multiple opportunities.
If you're somebody, for instance,
who is grieving so intensely and so often
that you're finding it immensely difficult
to move through grief at a reasonable rate,
and you might even say,
or find yourself diagnosed with prolonged grief disorder
or with complicated grief syndrome in a way
that's really impairing your adaptive functioning in life,
well, then it's not clear to me,
at least by my read of the data,
that you would want to engage in a lot of practices
to increase the mind-body relationship
and feeling so much of this attachment
because you're already feeling an immense amount of it.
Whereas other people who are feeling challenged
in accessing the feelings of attachment
and perhaps not functioning well as a consequence of that
might find that practicing breathing
in order to encourage respiratory signs of arrhythmia,
again, focusing on slowing your heart rate consciously
while you exhale and concentrating
on increasing your heart rate as you inhale,
even just as a brief practice
of even just one to three minutes
or one to five minutes every once in a while or per day,
that could be immensely beneficial
in building this mind-body relationship.
Because again, what this paper really points to
and set off a number of other investigations related to
is that for those that can really feel the relationship
between breathing, heart rate, what we call vagal tone,
well, those people are going to be in a better position
to move through grief,
not because they are disengaging
from the feelings of attachment,
but because they are better able to access
those feelings of attachment.
So what this relates to, of course, is that tripartite map,
that three-part map that we talked about earlier,
that representation of space, where things are,
where the person is, where their belongings are,
where their car is, where their bicycle is,
time, when you were expecting to see them
on a regular basis, when they would call,
when they would come home from work, et cetera,
and that third node or that third dimension of attachment,
which is literally attachment and closeness.
Well, what we're talking about here is anchoring
to that attachment and really feeling into that,
but then disengaging from the space and time map
that we call episodic memory,
that menu of prior experiences that keeps us in many ways
maladaptively in an expectation of what never can be again.
Now I'd like to take a moment and consider some of the tools
that you can access that support healthy transitioning
through grief, and these are tools distinct
from that neural map,
that space, time, closeness attachment map
that we were talking about before.
Rather, it's important to remind ourselves
that everything exists in a context
of our baseline physiology,
and I'm certainly not going to be the first or the last
to tell you that everything in life, learning relationships
with people that are still around,
our health in every way, immune system, et cetera,
function far better when we're sleeping really well,
and when we are generally awake during the daytime
and asleep at night.
I realize there are shift workers out there,
people who are traveling and are jet lagged.
First of all, thank you, shift workers, we rely on you.
We have an episode all about jet lag and shift work for you
and for trying to maintain the best possible mental
and physical health in the face of ongoing shift work
and jet lag.
You can find that episode on our website,
hubramalab.com, lots of behavioral tools,
some other tools as well.
Nonetheless, human beings are diurnal.
We were really designed to be awake mostly in the day
and asleep at night.
There are rare exceptions to this where people like
to stay up late and sleep in late,
but we are a diurnal species by way of our genetic wiring
and our neural circuit wiring.
There's a particular feature to our diurnal,
and diurnal meaning the opposite of nocturnal,
our diurnal pattern of the release of a hormone
called cortisol.
Cortisol is a stress hormone, it's sometimes called,
but cortisol has a lot of other effects,
many of which are positive.
Cortisol, for instance, protects us against infection.
It can help us in terms of waking up in the morning.
In fact, the pulse as it's called,
or the spike in cortisol early in the day
is part of the reason we wake up.
It's linked to our increase in temperature rhythms
and can further increase our temperature,
which leads to waking and so on.
The typical pattern of cortisol in a healthy individual,
and we really can say physically
and emotionally healthy individual,
is that cortisol is going to be somewhat high
right around waking,
and then is going to be highest as it ever will be
in the 24 hour period, about 45 minutes post waking.
Not exactly 45 minutes, but about 45 minutes.
And then it will drop gradually,
such that by about 4 p.m. in the afternoon,
which is actually when body temperature
tends to start to drop as well,
cortisol tends to be very low,
and then remains low in a healthy individual,
such that at 9 p.m. it's very low,
and throughout the night as we sleep, it's very low.
In fact, spikes or pulses in 9 p.m. cortisol
are a fairly reliable biomarker readout
of certain forms of depression and chronic anxiety.
This relates to the beautiful work of my colleagues
at Stanford and Stanford School of Medicine,
Dr. David Spiegel, who's been on this podcast,
and Dr. Robert Sapolsky, who has also been on this podcast.
There's a very interesting paper
exploring the relationship between cortisol rhythms
and grieving, in particular,
complicated versus non-complicated grieving.
Again, complicated grieving being the form of grieving
that reflects a immense challenge
to people moving through the grieving process
such that it really needs to be dealt with, right?
Again, grieving is healthy,
but complicated grieving is a prolonged grieving
and has other dimensions as well,
hence the name complicated.
The title of this paper is
Diurnal Cortisol in Complicated and Non-complicated Grief,
Slope Differences Across the Day.
And the figure to orient to in this paper,
if you do decide to check it out,
and we'll put a link to it,
is figure one, which beautifully shows,
or I should say very clearly shows,
that in individuals that are experiencing complicated grief,
there's the same general contour
of high cortisol upon waking,
even higher about 45 minutes after waking,
and then a reduction in cortisol by 4 p.m.
and even further reduction by 9 p.m.,
so just as it were in a typical individual
or somebody who is in non-complicated grieving.
However, when you compare the cortisol levels
between people experiencing complicated grieving
versus non-complicated grieving,
what you find is the 4 p.m. and 9 p.m. cortisol levels
are significantly higher
than they are in the non-complicated grieving group.
This raises a very interesting idea
and relates very closely
to what we were talking about with vagal tone.
You could imagine a situation
in which people who are experiencing complicated grief
have higher levels of afternoon and nighttime cortisol
because they are in complicated grief,
but you could also imagine the opposite,
that they're experiencing complicated grief
because of the fact that they have elevated cortisol.
Now, it's very likely that it's bi-directional,
that the answer isn't one or the other, but both,
that complicated grief changes patterns of cortisol
and that patterns of cortisol change the likelihood
that one has complicated grief.
That's the most logical interpretation of data like these.
However, when taken along with the data on vagal tone,
that people who have a higher level of vagal tone
are better able to navigate situations
of the sort that we're talking about,
and that some people perhaps have oxytocin receptors
or patterns of catecholamines or epinephrine
that position them to be more likely to grieve
in a particular way,
we arrive at a scenario where it makes very good sense
to think about modulating,
that is controlling the foundation of your life
in a way that establishes cortisol rhythms
and sleep patterns and patterns of autonomic arousal
and catecholamine release that position you
to navigate the grief process in the best possible way.
If that was a complicated mouthful to digest,
let me restate it in a simpler way.
If you are somebody who is heading into grief
or is challenged with grief, complicated grief or otherwise,
prolonged grief or otherwise,
getting adequate sleep at night
and establishing as normal a pattern of cortisol as possible
is going to be very important.
And there's a very simple, straightforward way to do this.
And I apologize to the listeners of this podcast in advance
if I sound like a repeating record,
but the most powerful way to do this
is to view sunlight very close to waking.
It does not have to be right at sunrise,
but when you get up in the morning, if the sun isn't out,
please turn on as many bright lights as possible
in your environment.
And then once the sun is out,
try and get some bright sunlight in your eyes.
Never look at any light so bright
that it's painful to look at sunlight or otherwise.
If you live in an area of the world
where there isn't a lot of sunlight,
please keep in mind that sunlight coming through cloud cover
is going to still be a very effective mechanism
for establishing this cortisol rhythm.
Why do I say this thing about sunlight
over and over and over again?
Well, having an early day cortisol peak
and a very low cortisol level late in the day,
4 p.m. and 9 p.m. is immensely beneficial.
It reflects a properly regulated autonomic nervous system.
It means being alert during the day
and your ability to sleep at night is tightly correlated
to this viewing of sunlight in the morning.
If you have additional questions about this
or these protocols,
please see our Mastering Sleep episode
also at hubermanlab.com.
But in brief, you don't want to wear sunglasses
when you do this.
You do not want to do this through a window or a windshield.
It is 50 times less effective at least
because of filtering of the proper wavelengths.
It is fine to wear eyeglasses,
meaning corrective lenses or contacts,
even if they have UV protection.
Again, sunlight is best.
10 minutes to 30 minutes,
depending on how bright it is outside
and so on and so forth.
I keep coming back to this protocol
because first of all, it is a zero cost,
but very effective way to regulate things
like cortisol rhythms, melatonin rhythms,
wakefulness during the day,
ease of falling asleep at night and so on.
And second of all,
because I want to emphasize this idea of modulation.
There are processes in our brain and body
which directly mediate some psychological effect
or physiological effect, right?
Dopamine is directly involved in motivation.
If you're somebody who struggles with motivation,
your dopamine system is likely to be dysregulated
in some way and there are behavioral tools
and other tools to adjust that.
We had an episode on dopamine motivation and drive
that talks extensively about those tools.
However, the process of grief can't be distilled down
to one molecule, one circuit such that we can say,
oh, you know, take this supplement or eat this diet
and or exercise in the following way
and you'll recover from grief more quickly.
It's simply not the case.
It is the case, however, that proper sleep at night
sets the foundation for the proper emotional tone
to be able to navigate physical, psychological
and other types of challenges.
And not incidentally sleep at night,
I should say sufficient duration and quality
of sleep at night is the way
in which you engage neuroplasticity,
the reordering of neural connections
and everything we've been talking about today
about reordering of the maps in your mind,
this tripartite three-part map of space, time and closeness
involves neuroplasticity, the reconfiguring of connections
between neurons, strengthening certain pathways
and not strengthening others,
actively trying to disengage from the what if, right?
This counterintuitive thinking,
actively trying to disengage from the expectations
that someone will be there.
Although when you find yourself doing that,
understanding why it's so reflexive and normal to do that,
actively trying to lean into the real attachment
to somebody, animal or thing.
And yet at the same time, not diluting yourself
and undermining the whole process of grieving
by trying to imagine that they are in fact
still truly there, right?
It's a very narrow knife edge of a process,
which is why it's so challenging.
Regulating your cortisol rhythm
through viewing sunlight early in the day.
And I should also say avoiding bright lights
from artificial sources in the evening,
generally 10 p.m. to 4 a.m.
But certainly in the evening, trying to dim lights
in your immediate environment,
trying to avoid bright screens,
bright artificial lights as much as possible
and accessing that deep sleep.
That's modulating, it's setting an overall autonomic state
or an overall autonomic landscape
would be the better way to describe it.
That's going to allow you to sleep and get neuroplasticity,
sleep and be in the best emotional state
to navigate the grieving process.
Because it's only fair to say that the grieving process
as we're describing it is hard
and not just because it's emotionally hard,
it's cognitively hard.
You just think about what's required
to move through grief properly, if you will.
It's thinking about and actually physically experiencing
the depth, the full depth of the attachment to the person,
while at the same time trying to uncouple
from that rich menu, that catalog of episodic memories
that can date back many, many years
and have so much richness,
so many predictions form on the basis
of those episodic memories
and actively trying to distance ourselves
from those memories by being very anchored in the fact
that we are present, we are the person alone in that room
or in some cases with a bereavement group in that room
or with other people that are mourning the loss
of that individual animal or thing.
And that knife edge of feeling the intense attachment
while also disengaging from all the things
that led to that attachment,
well, it's understandable why that would be so challenging.
And it should also be understandable
why positioning yourself to be able to do that
in the best possible way requires proper sleep.
So what are the tools that we can think about using
in terms of healthy adaptive moving through grief,
trying to avoid complicated grief
and prolonged grief disorders?
I realize that word disorder implies all sorts of things,
but again, those are just naming categorizations
that people come up with that I think fairly reflect
the fact that some people have more challenge moving
through grieving than others.
And for some people, it can be very extended.
I think the common misunderstanding
is that proper grieving involves moving
through something quickly.
We're certainly not saying that.
However, it is very clear that some people can get stuck
and that process of getting stuck,
you should now understand has a lot to do with maintaining
or reactivating those episodic memories,
those expectations of where somebody will be
in space and time.
So what can we say about the tools for moving through grief?
Clearly, it's a value to dedicate some period of time,
perhaps every day, perhaps every other day,
depending on your capacity and schedule.
These could be periods of time ranging anywhere
from five to 45 minutes, maybe longer.
These blocks of time would be appropriately described
as rational grieving, right?
Rational grieving is a clear acceptance of the new reality
that the person, animal, or thing no longer exists
in the same space-time dimensionality
that we knew them before, and yet holding onto
and anchoring to the attachment that we had.
This is, again, not an unhealthy anchoring
to the attachment.
This is really anchoring to the depth and the intensity
of the attachment that existed as a way to,
for lack of a better way to put it,
push off from those episodic memories,
to distance ourselves from them,
because those episodic memories are the ones that lead us
to look for the person in our current reality.
And assuming this is a real and complete loss,
those sorts of expectations are maladaptive.
They do not serve us well.
The second aspect of this is to understand
that the node of the map,
the component of the neural map that you're anchoring to
is a very real component of you.
These are literally cells
that represent the depth of attachment.
They are linked up with your emotional centers in the brain,
and indeed they're linked up with your body.
I think one of the things that comes up so often
when people are grieving is why does it hurt so much?
Well, that hurt is that yearning.
It's that anticipation of action that you want to engage in,
but some part of you at least knows that it leads nowhere.
It's that reaching for that glass of water
in a kind of desert of thirst,
and you know you can't have it.
That's why it hurts so badly
because the systems of your brain and body
are in a place of anticipation of readiness.
And given the activation of these brain reward systems
like the nucleus accumbens,
given your now understanding of oxytocin
being more enriched in the, excuse me,
in the nucleus accumbens of some individuals
and as opposed to others,
it should make perfect sense as to why it's so painful
in your body.
We talked a moment ago about the importance
of accessing quality sleep on a regular basis,
gave you at least one tool to do that.
There, again, a rich array of tools to do that
in the Mastering Sleep episode.
And again, highlighting the importance of sleep
for not just emotion regulation and autonomic control,
which is so vital, but also for making sure
that neuroplasticity takes place,
because again, neuroplasticity is a two-part process.
There's the triggering of the plasticity,
which in the case of the things we're talking about today
will be naturally activated by the practice
of a dedicated focusing on the attachment,
feeling the attachment to the person,
maybe even writing about the attachment to the person
as was described in that previous study.
But also just the plasticity is triggered
by the mere loss of that person,
the intensity of that experience.
But neuroplasticity, the literal rewiring of connections
occurs during deep sleep
and in what I call non-sleep deep rest or NSDR.
And you can find NSDR scripts.
These are short behavioral protocols that you do
for 10 to 30 minutes at some point throughout the day,
maybe even multiple times a day
that have been shown to accelerate neuroplasticity.
So having such a practice can be very useful
and understand that it involves some cognitive work.
We have to hold onto the attachment
and imagine and feel as much as we can the attachment
while also being extremely rationally grounded
and trying to not try to hold onto the past,
trying to not anticipate the person walking in the room.
This is very hard
because when we think about the attachment,
the attachment tends to drag with it
those episodic memories, that rich catalog of experiences.
The expectation that they will walk in the room
is perfectly natural.
The hard cognitive work
is to experience the deep emotional attachment
while at the same time severing from
or distancing ourselves from these expectations
that they'll suddenly show up in our reality
when in fact they won't.
And we talked about preparing ourselves for grief, right?
If we have a loved one that's dying
or we anticipate that at some point
we are going to have a loss of some sort,
could be death, could be a loss of another type,
breakup, et cetera,
that we can prepare ourselves to grieve more adaptively
by regulating the level of catecholamines,
in particular epinephrine.
That was well-described in the study
that I referred to earlier.
And tools such as the one found
in our Mastering Stress episode
and tools of the sort that we talked about today,
increasing that vagal tone
by actively building up the relationship between exhales
and slowing down of the heart rate,
so-called respiratory sinus arrhythmia,
those things can be very useful tools.
So we can actually encourage our nervous system
and build our nervous system
and build our mind to prepare for grief
when it inevitably will come.
Again, this is not about buffering ourselves
from the realities of life.
This is not about engaging from grief
as a real and important process.
And indeed it is a real and important process to engage in.
Those that enter denial
or trying to distract themselves with substances
or thinking or distracting of behavior,
substances or otherwise,
won't move through grief as well,
as adaptively as those who embrace a process
of the sort that I'm describing here.
And of course, I want to restate again,
that even though grief and depression
are now known to be fundamentally different,
even though people move through the different stages
of grief at different rates
and sometimes skip stages, et cetera,
it is often important to access
a trained professional psychologist or psychiatrist
or both or bereavement group or all of the above
in order to get the proper support for grieving.
So this is a podcast about science and science-based tools,
but I absolutely want to emphasize
that there are terrific resources out there
that you can access.
I don't say this in any kind of glib
or kind of pass the buck kind of way.
There are wonderful trained therapists, bereavement groups,
psychiatrists that are expert
in navigating these sorts of things.
I like to think that the tools that we've talked about today
would be not only compatible,
but would be complimentary
to the sorts of approaches that they take.
And as we think about this process of grief,
as we all should at some point in our lives,
because we all indeed will experience grief
in one form or another,
I would hope that the information that we discussed today
would not only give you some tools,
but hopefully give you a better understanding
of not just the people that you've lost
or that you stand to lose,
not just the animals that you've lost and stand to lose,
but also give you a sense of why it is
that the people who are still in your life
and that you're attached to,
the animals that are still in your life
and that you're attached to
have such profound meaning for you.
And I would encourage you to not lean away from,
but rather to lean into
the building of those episodic memories,
to build up a richer and richer set of experiences
and emotional attachments.
Because while the process of grieving
is in direct relation to how close we are attached to people,
there are ways to move through it.
And of course it is the depth of our attachments
and the number and the depth of meaning of experiences
that we share with others and with animals
that makes life so rich and worth living.
So I just want to take a moment and say thank you
for being willing to explore this rather complicated
and sometimes extremely challenging thing
that we call grief from the perspective
or through the lens of neuroscience and psychology.
I certainly learned a lot in exploring this literature.
I also really look forward to hosting
people like Dr. O'Connor on the podcast
and others on the podcast
who've done such beautiful work in this area.
I've put out the request and hopefully they'll join us soon
to further elaborate and teach us about
this fundamental component of our lives.
If you're learning from and are enjoying this podcast,
please subscribe to us on YouTube.
That's a terrific zero cost way to support us.
In addition, please subscribe to the podcast
on Spotify and Apple and at both Spotify and Apple,
you can leave us up to a five-star review.
If you have comments and suggestions, feedback,
or you'd like to see a particular guest on this podcast,
please put those suggestions, comments and feedback
in the comment section on YouTube.
In addition, please check out the sponsors mentioned
at the beginning of today's podcast.
That's the best way to support us.
Not during today's episode,
but on many previous episodes of the Huberman Lab Podcast,
we've discussed supplements.
While supplements aren't necessary for everybody,
many people derive tremendous benefit from them
for things like easing and accelerating the transition time
into sleep and getting better, deeper sleep,
as well as things such as focus, et cetera.
We've partnered with Momentous Supplements
because Momentous Supplements, first of all,
are of extremely high quality.
That's obviously important.
Also, they ship internationally.
We had heard from many of you
that you were having trouble accessing
some of the supplements that were described
on the Huberman Lab Podcast
because you did not live in the US.
Momentous ships both within the US and abroad.
And many of you have also requested
that there be a single site where you could access
all of the supplements that we've talked about
on the Huberman Lab Podcast.
Right now at livemomentous.com slash Huberman,
you can find a subset of the supplements
that have been described on this podcast.
Again, all of the very highest quality,
each single ingredient supplements,
that turns out to be very important
if you're trying to develop
the proper array of supplements for you.
It's not helpful to have supplements
that include many ingredients.
So we encourage Momentous
to have single ingredient supplements
with dosages that allow you to build up
from the minimal effective dose and so on.
And the catalog of supplements
they are going to add to that location,
livemomentous.com slash Huberman,
is going to expand in the weeks and months to come.
And we expect that in fairly short amount of time,
all of the supplements that we've described
on the Huberman Lab Podcast will be there.
If you're not already following Huberman Lab
on Instagram and Twitter,
I post science and science-related tools
at Huberman Lab on Instagram,
also at Huberman Lab on Twitter.
Oftentimes that material will overlap somewhat
with the content covered on this podcast,
but more often than not,
what I'm covering on Instagram and Twitter
is distinct from the information I cover
on the Huberman Lab Podcast.
We also have a newsletter that has summaries of podcasts
and points to specific protocols
and links that could be useful to you.
That is the Neural Network Newsletter.
And you can find it at HubermanLab.com.
Go to the menu, go to newsletter.
You can sign up simply by giving us your email.
We do not share your email with anybody else.
Our privacy policy is there and is made very clear.
You can also see some newsletters of months past.
So you can assess whether or not
you really do want to sign up.
Although I like to think that you will.
Again, zero cost, total privacy of your email account.
And many people find those summaries and takeaway tools
to be very useful in navigating
these admittedly long podcast episodes.
And last, but certainly not least,
thank you for your interest in science.